---
layout: post_dnd
title: A Guide To Barbarian In D&D 5e (Part 2)
subtitle: Also known as "How To Pick What Kind Of Manly You Want To Be (even if you're not a male)"
author: Skyrah1
permalink: a-guide-to-barbarian-in-d&d-5e-part-2
---
# Introduction

[In the last article,](a-guide-to-barbarian-in-d&d-5e-part-1) I gave an overview of the Barbarian's core class features and their role in combat, as well as some ideas on how one might roleplay them.

Today, we'll be taking a look at the different Primal Paths from the SRD, Player's Handbook (PHB), Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide (SCAG), and Xanathar's Guide To Everything (XGTE). Your character gets access to **one** of these at level 3, and this will help you choose how *exactly* you want to unleash your Rage.

*DISCLAIMER: I may use "you" and "your character" interchangeably throughout this article to refer to your Player Character. Please don't actually try to strangle the DM, as you'll most likely end up with a restraining order (or worse).*

# Path of the Berserker (SRD)

Ah, the good ol' Berserker. This subclass helps improve on what the Barbarian arguably does best: hitting things until they're dead.

Starting off with the first subclass feature at level 3, you gain the option to go into a frenzy when you Rage. Doing so grants you the ability to make a weapon attack as a bonus action on each of your following turns, at the cost of suffering exhaustion when your Rage ends.

At 6th level, your second subclass feature makes it so you can't be charmed or frightened while raging, which is pretty significant considering your character will likely have a less-than-ideal Wisdom score to resist charms. This is especially helpful for your teammates, as nearly nothing is worse for your party than having your strongest damage dealer and tank *suddenly turn around and start laying into you*.

At 10th level, yhe third feature you get lets you use your action to attempt to scare a creature, giving it the frightened condition. This one feels less useful in combat and more so in an RP situation, but it does give you something to do if you're forced to stay out of range during a fight (other than throwing stuff at the enemy).

Finally at 14th level, you gain the ability to make a melee weapon attack against a creature as a reaction when it damages you, for no cost other than the HP that was lost.

Some players feel that this subclass suffers as a whole, due to the trade of exhaustion for what feels like just a *slightly* better attack than the one you'd get normally from dual wielding, but it's effectively a 33% increase to your damage per round. Speaking from personal experience, the bonus action attack can actually be *very strong*, especially if you're using it with feats like Great Weapon Master.

In terms of character concepts, this might be your preferred option for a subclass if you want to play a vanilla berserker-style character (it's in the name), a focused swordsman, or a shounen anime protagonist that has the whole "dangerous power that's harmful to themselves" schtick going for them.

# Path of the Totem Warrior (PHB)

Before XGTE came out, this was one of the more popular subclasses due to the amount of customization characters had with this subclass, as well as the potential to build an unkillable tank. The flavor of this subclass is that you're channeling spirit animals through your character when you Rage, to gain supernatural abilities.

Let's get the less interesting features out of the way first. At 3rd level, you gain the ability to cast Beast Sense and Speak with Animals as rituals, and you also learn to cast Commune with Nature as a ritual at level 10.

Also at 3rd level, you get to choose an animal totem spirit and gain some of its features. You need to make a physical totem object that incorporates some part of your chosen animal, and once you do you gain abilities related to it while you're Raging. This can range from enemies gaining disadvantage on opportunity attacks against you, to granting advantage on melee attack rolls against creatures you're fighting, to granting you *resistance to every damage type in the game* (except psychic, so you'll grow to hate Mindflayers).

The 6th level and 14th level also grant you more abilities based on a totem animal of your choice, ***which doesn't have to be the same as your previous animal***. This means you get to mix and match your character's abilities, allowing you to create a Frankenstein's monster-esque character of your choice.

Speaking of Frankenstein's monster, I just realized that if you wanted to play as one, this would be a pretty decent subclass to pick, flavoring different animal totems as different corpses that make up your character. If you want to go for the whole animal thing anyway, go right ahead, but keep in mind that (depending on how lenient your DM is) you can rename the animal options to better reflect the background of your character. Maybe your Sailor Totem Barbarian has a Shark totem instead of a Bear totem, or maybe your Barbarian in Chult has a Velociraptor totem in place of the Wolf. Ah, the joys of reflavoring!

# Path of the Battlerager (SCAG)

From what I gather, it's one of the less popular options among the Barbarian subclasses. Contrary to the shirtless-buff-dude-swinging-a-sword fantasy, this subclass is centered around **spiked armor** in combat. Officially, the subclass is restricted to dwarves, but if you want to play as something else, ask your DM if they can lift this restriction. They just might say "yes".

Looking at its features, it does admittedly feel a little less powerful than the Berserker.At 3rd level, you get the ability to use your spiked armor as a weapon, and you can make an attack with it as a bonus action on your turns while Raging. In addition, upon successfully grappling a creature, they take a small amount of damage (a whopping *3 HP*). *This does not scale*.

At 6th level, you gain temporary HP equal to your Constitution modifier when you Recklessly Attack while Raging. Even with the resistance to weapon damage and a CON modifier of +5, ten extra effective hitpoints doesn't *feel* like much, but it applies every time you use Reckless Attack (which will likely be most of the time), at no additional cost. So it's a decent bonus.

At 10th level, you can Dash as a bonus action while raging, and at 14th level, you deal 3 damage to enemies within 5 feet of you that hit you with melee attacks. The former feature will help you get to that pesky caster in the back faster, and the latter is nice to have against hordes of weaker opponents but otherwise not very powerful.

All in all, it feels like the features of this subclass lack impact, but it's a decent upgrade nonetheless. If you like the idea of literally throwing yourself at the enemy like a wrecking ball, go ahead and pick this.

# Path of the Ancestral Guardian (XGTE)

This subclass lets you channel the spirits of your ancestors to protect your allies in combat. Both this subclass and the Bear version of the Totem Warrior are good at tanking, but while the Totem Warrior is better at *taking hits* with its resistance to nearly every damage type, the Ancestral Guardian excels at *maintaining aggro and protecting teammates*.

Beginning at 3rd level, the first creature you hit while raging has disadvantage on attacks against anyone other than you, as spectral warriors hinder their attacks. In addition, your allies have resistance to attacks dealt by that creature. This works as an effective way to "taunt". No longer will you need to Reckless Attack and put yourself in danger to protect your party - just hit your target and let your ancestors take care of the rest.

At 6th level, you gain a Spirit Shield that lets you use your reaction to reduce the amount of damage an ally takes, so even if you can't "taunt" every enemy on the map, you can still make it a little easier on your team.

At 10th level, you gain the ability to cast Augury or Clairvoyance once per short rest. Clairvoyance is good for scouting, and Augury can be nice to have for puzzle-solving, but by now it's likely you have a caster that has both of these spells. If not, more power to you!

Finally at 14th level, you deal damage to the enemy attacking the ally you're protecting with Spirit Shield, equal to the amount you prevent. This is a nice way to punish opponents for not attacking you.

This subclass is very well suited for a party's tank, but it should be noted that the exact wording of the first feature means that it works on *any kind of attack* RAW, not just melee. This means a Barbarian archer build is potentially viable (though I've yet to try it myself).

# Path of the Storm Herald (XGTE)

Barbarians following this path affect the environment around them when they Rage.

When you pick this subclass, you pick one of three terrains: desert, sea or tundra. Unlike with the Totem Warrior, this applies to all of your subclass features, but you can switch to a different terrain when you level up.

At level 3, you create a Storm Aura around you that causes an effect to trigger on creatures within 10 feet of you when you activate Rage, depending on your chosen terrain. This can either be AoE fire damage (desert), a single target lightning strike (sea) or temporary hit points for you and your allies (tundra) - all of which get stronger as you level up. You can use your bonus action to cause this effect to trigger again.

At level 6, you gain resistance to your terrain's associated damage type, along with some minor benefits such as being unaffected by extreme heat, a swimming speed, etc. At level 10, the resistance to damage can be shared by allies within 10 feet of you.

Finally at level 14, you get to either retaliate against an enemy that hits you with an attack (desert), knock people down when you hit them (sea) or root an enemy in your aura (tundra).

All in all, this subclass feels slightly less optimized than the others, but what it lacks in combat strength it more than makes up for with style. The Storm Aura provides something new as opposed to weapon attacks for the nth time, and the elemental effects open up a lot of opportunities for cool character concepts.

# Path of the Zealot (XGTE)

Whether your character is a cultist of Bane or just *really* passionate about the whole "DEUS VULT" thing, the Path of the Zealot is for Barbarians who love their deities a little too much.

Starting off at level 3, you gain extra damage that scales with your level on the first attack you hit with. This can be either radiant or necrotic, which you choose when you first gain the feature. Also at 3rd level, spells that bring you back from the dead don't require material components. This is a really nice feature that helps take some financial pressure off your cleric, especially if you're following the typical Barbarian doctrine of Leeroy Jenkins-ing your way into every fight.

At level 6, you get to reroll a saving throw once per Rage use. This is also very useful (see above). At level 10, you can use your bonus action once per long rest to inspire up to ten other creatures, granting them advantage on attacks and saving throws until your next turn. Get everyone else at the table singing praises to Torm with you!

Finally at level 14, your Rage allows you to ***keep fighting after you hit 0 hit points***. You still make death saving throws, but if you fail them all, your character only dies *after* the Rage ends, and if you manage to heal even the *tiniest* bit before that happens, your character will live.

Overall, the Zealot is a very powerful subclass, especially with the whole "too angry to die" thing. You wanna play as the Doomslayer? This is how you play as the Doomslayer.