---
layout: post_dnd
title: How To Be Better At Tanking In 5e
subtitle: "Hint: D&D is NOT an MMO!"
edited: 2020-06-12
permalink: how-to-be-better-at-tanking-in-5e
---
*Disclaimer: I may use "you" to refer to either you as the player, or the PC you take your role as at your table. Please use common sense and don't actually jump on the table, yelling "I WILL BE YOUR SHIELD" to your friends as you stare down your Dungeon Master. It's top-notch roleplaying, but the DM spent weeks on that map they drew for this encounter, and they're very sad that you've got your dirty footprints on them now.*

# Introduction

So you want to play a tank? The party's stalwart shield, the impenetrable wall between you and your allies. You want to protect your teammates, keeping the BBEG's attention while your archer turns them into a pincushion and your wizard flings Fireballs at both of you with reckless abandon, taking all that friendly fire like a champ because you know you're tough enough to handle it.

If you have the privilege of playing a few tank characters in RPG video games, you may reckon you've got some decent experience that'll hopefully translate into the game...right?

Well, I've got good news and bad news.

### The good news

The good news is that there are tons of options for you to improve your own survivablilty. Barbarians have their Rage, Clerics and Paladins have healing and defensive spells, Rogues and Monks get different ways to avoid taking damage, etc. Anyone with proficiency in even medium armor can have a decent AC. With the right subclass, feats and spell choices, even Wizards can be built in a way that makes you as a character *really* hard to kill.

Feats such as Heavy Armor Mastery, Tough, Shield Master, Resilient and Defensive Duelist also make your character tougher, and with the amount of ASIs Fighters get they can afford to pick up at least one or two of these. Alternatively, you could invest all of it into boosting Consititution, becoming a huge sack of hit points.

Even some races, such as Hill Dwarves, Goliaths and Half-Orcs, have some features to further help them in this regard.

So, with the sheer number of ways to boost your chances of surviving anything (barring the classic "rocks fall, everyone dies"), surely tanking would be easy given the right build. There's just one *tiny* problem with making your character completely unkillable...

### The bad news

As mentioned before, **5e is not an MMO**. It may even be a surprise to you that D&D isn't a video game at all and is, instead, a tabletop roleplaying game with enemies that don't just follow a predefined script (of code, anyway). They are played by the **Dungeon Master**. Think of it less like PVE and more like PVP, in terms of enemy behaviour anyway (you're *not* fighting the *DM*, your *character* is fighting *fictional kobolds*, so keep calm and put the pencil down).

What does that mean? Simply put, **aggro isn't a real thing in D&D**. If your DM is playing an intelligent enemy...well, *intelligently*, chances are they'll stop wailing on you the moment they realize it's a lost cause. An enemy with decent mobility could just waltz right past you and your immobile tank build, charging straight at your squishy wizard. Opponents with ranged attacks can skip the walk.

So, as disappointing as it may be, you can't just walk into an encounter, push a few buttons on a keyboard, and just expect to keep everyone's attention. Thankfully, there are still many ways you can protect your party.

# Helpful game mechanics

In my experience, there are a few different aspects that a tank should be at least decent at, regardless of the medium of entertainment.

### Survivability

The first aspect is **survivability**, which we touched on earlier. You can't protect your friends effectively if you're dead or dying, so it's important for a tank character to be able to stand their ground in a pinch.

### Control

The second aspect is **control**. You want to be able to control the way your enemies act. As stated before aggro's not really a thing in D&D. The closest you've got to a taunt are the Ancestral Guardian's Ancestral Protectors and the Battlemaster's Goading Attack, and even those *discourage* attacking your allies, rather than outright preventing them from doing so.

Fortunately, there are plenty of other ways to control the fight in D&D. Spells and feats that allow you to mess with an enemy's movement, positioning and/or vision like Sentinel, Thunderwave and Fog Cloud can help you lock down enemies, preventing them from targeting your friends and/or *forcing* them to fight you. Actions with hard CC (stuns, paralysis, etc.) like Banishment or Stunning Strike can take a troublesome opponent out of a fight entirely, at least for a little while. With the Warcaster feat, single target control spells can be used in place of opportunity attacks to keep enemies in place. If all else fails and you didn't dump that Strength stat, you could always try to grapple your opponent.

Other than crowd control, you could also try and grab the enemy's attention by simply dealing massive amounts of damage in relation to your party. Personally, this is my favorite form of tanking: build your character to be like a super-heavy Maus tank and lead the charge, blasting and running over anything in your path while using your massive health pool and heavy armor to shrug off all but the deadliest of attacks. The best and most effective form of crowd control is death, after all.

### Protection

The third aspect is **protection** - defensive moves the rest of your team. There's no guarantee that you'll be able to stay in control, and you want to be ready to peel enemies off your team when something goes wrong. Tank classes in MMOs tend to have at least one ability dedicated to protecting teammates, such as taking a portion of the damage that one of them suffers.

Once again, you've got quite a few options to protect your teammates. Some class features like the Ancestral Guardian Barbarian's Spirit Shield, the Fighter's Protection fighting style and the Paladin's Aura of Protection can protect your teammates from incoming damage and/or other detrimental effects. Buff spells like Bless and Aid can also help in this regard, with the former being one of, if not the strongest 1st level buff spells in the game.

### Class choice

Like I said before, pretty much any character can be built to be an effective tank given the right build. That said, if you want to *really* min-max your character to be a tank like Maple from *BOFURI*, you should know that some classes can be more easily built to do the job.

**Barbarians** are a shoe-in here. With the highest hit die in the game and the ability to resist physical damage, they can definitely stand their ground. With their ability to dish out an *insane* amount of damage themselves, they naturally tend to be the scariest member of their party. Totem Warrior Barbarians can even get resistance to most other types of damage, and the Ancestral Guardian is good at...well, guarding.

**Fighters** can also be built to be pretty tough, with proficiency in heavy armor and, as mentioned before, the sheer amount of ASIs they get for feats like Polearm Master to control the fight better, or Martial Adept for Battlemasters that prefer more options. Eldritch Knights in particular have the option of adding a whole bunch of defensive spells to their repertoire to keep themselves alive.

**Clerics** are usually thought of as healbots, especially in MMOs, but they can be really good at many other things in D&D - including tanking. Clerics with the domains of Life and Forge are especially good at it, but any cleric can do it well due to the amount of sustain from healing spells and great protective buffs. Spirit Guardians is more offense-oriented, but it's an amazing concentration spell for any Cleric tank. It doubles as AoE damage *and* an AoE slow that follows you around, making it an excellent frontline control spell.

**Paladins** also make fantastic tanks, and with Fighters and Clerics also on the list, it should come as no big surprise. Their Aura of Protection can protect their party members quite effectively, and they can use Lay On Hands and healing spells to quickly patch themselves or a party member up in a pinch. Like Clerics, they also get quite a few buffs to keep the party going. Good subclass choices include the Oath of the Ancients, Oath of the Crown and Oath of Redemption to better protect your allies, as well as Oath of Conquest for effective crowd control.

Other choices with a fair amount of tanking potential include:
- Way of the Long Death Monk
- Abjuration Wizard
- Bladesinger Wizard
- War Wizard
- Circle of the Moon Druid
- Fiend Warlock
- Hexblade Warlock
- Arcane Trickster Rogues
- Rangers
- Bards (those guys can do anything)

# Roleplaying

Remember when I said there's no aggro mechanic in D&D? That's still true, but there is a potential alternative depending on your DM. Instead of treating taunts like a button press, **roleplay your tank** in such a way that makes you impossible to ignore.

Even the most intelligent creatures have feelings, and that means you can exploit them. Taunt them into attacking you. Call the dragon an obese winged lizard (during the fight, not before unless you either can't avoid it or *want* to die). Laugh at their inability to hit you or succeed at life in general. Fart in their direction. Be the little sh** on the battlefield that everyone *has* to kill for the sake of their own sanity. Do however be prepared if you choose this approach, because it has the potential to backfire horribly and actually get your character killed.

Alternatively, you could steal the Macguffin from the BBEG, or intimidate them into believing you're the most dangerous member of your party. If you're fighting a terrifying but blind creature that's attracted to the screams of your frightened allies, bash your shield and scream louder. If that monster likes to eat a particular kind of animal, drench yourself in that animal's blood. Anything that gets their attention.

The best part is that anyone can do this - regardless of race, class, spells, feats or items your character has. As long as you're willing to put your character in harm's way for the good of the group, you'll always have the option of roleplaying it out. Your DM might make or ask you to make a couple of dice rolls, but for the most part you're not limited to just the rules of the game, so get creative!

The downside is that these methods are, of course, almost entirely dependent on your DM. It's possible they won't notice your attempts to get the enemy's attention, so try to communicate that intention to them as clearly as possible. If your DM is *really* stubborn and outright ignores your character, good luck.